DOC-2199-Added V3 Syntax (#214)
tigergraph/gsql-docs: modules/querying/pages/syntax-versions.adoc

|Use `source_vset -(edge_set)- target_vset` notation. Vertices and edges are separated without additional symbols for vertices, for example, `Person -(FRIENDS)- Colleague`.
|Use `(source_vset) -[edge_set]- (target_vset)` notation, where vertices are enclosed in parentheses () and edges are enclosed in square brackets [] . For example: `(Person) -[FRIENDS]- (Colleague)`.

|Alias Ordering
|Object sets and aliases follow `source_vset:Alias -(edge_set:EdgeAlias)- target_set:Alias`.
|Object sets and aliases follow `(Alias:source_vset) -[EdgeAlias:edge_set]- (Alias:target_set)`, reversing the order of alias vs. object set.

|Symbols for Edge Direction
|Directionality is applied at the edge-set level. Supports `<` (left), `>` (right), and `_` (undirected).
|Directionality applies to the entire edge pattern. Symbols include `\<-` (left), `\->` (right), `~` (undirected).

|Edge Direction Syntax
|Supports granular directionality at the individual edge set level, allowing multiple edge sets in a pattern to have distinct directions.
|Directionality is applied globally at the edge pattern level, ensuring consistency across the entire edge pattern.

|Quantified Multi-Hop Patterns

> |V2 supports explicit repetition for multi-hop patterns. For example: `-(FRIENDS*1..3)\->`
> |V3 simplifies multi-hop patterns by using `{m,n}` GQL-style quantifiers. For example: `[FRIENDS]\->{1,3}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|V2 uses *j..k to express a range of j to k repeated edges, for example: `-(FRIENDS*1..3)\->`
|V3 uses {j,k} to express a range of j to k repeated edge patterns, for example: For example: `[FRIENDS]\->{1,3}`
```

|===

=== V2 vs. V3 Syntax: Examples and Explanations

1. *Vertex-Edge-Vertex Markers:*

* *V2 Syntax:* `Person -(FRIENDS)- Colleague`
* *V3 Syntax:* `(Person) -[FRIENDS]- (Colleague)`
* In V3, parentheses around vertices and square brackets around edges provide a clearer structure for path patterns.

2. *Alias Ordering:*

* *V2 Syntax:* `Person:p -(FRIENDS:f)- Colleague:c`
* *V3 Syntax:* `(p:Person) -[f:FRIENDS]- (c:Colleague)`
* The `alias:object_set` format in V3 improves readability, particularly in queries with complex relationships.

3. *Symbols for Edge Direction:*

* *V2 Syntax:* `-(FRIENDS>:f)-`
* *V3 Syntax:* `\<-[f:FRIENDS]\->`
* Directionality is applied globally to the entire edge pattern.

4. *Filters in Edge Patterns:*

* *V2 Syntax:* Filtering is applied outside the `FROM` clause using a `WHERE` condition:
`SELECT Person FROM Person -(FRIENDS)- Colleague WHERE FRIENDS.length > 2`
* *V3 Syntax:* Filters can also be placed within an edge pattern for more local scope:
`SELECT Person FROM (Person) -[FRIENDS WHERE FRIENDS.length > 2]\-> (Colleague)`

5. *Quantified Multi-Hop Patterns:*

* *V2 Syntax:* `-(FRIENDS*1..3)\->`
* *V3 Syntax:* `[FRIENDS]\->{1,3}`

> * In V3, quantification is expressed using {m,n} syntax for variable-length edge patterns, which simplifies the syntax and provides a more consistent approach.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

== Comparing V2 and V3 Edge Directions

In the following table,

1. *E1 and E2:* These represent directed edge types. A directed edge has a defined direction, such as `Person -> Company`.

2. *U1 and U2:* These represent undirected edge types. An undirected edge does not have a direction and connects vertices symmetrically, such as `Person - Person`.

3. *Alias (A):* The alias is a short name or label given to an edge or vertex for use in queries.

4. *Edge Direction:* 

* *Left (`<`):* Represents edges directed towards the starting vertex.
* *Right (`>`):* Represents edges directed away from the starting vertex.
* *Undirected (`~`):* Represents edges with no directionality.
* *Combination (`<~`, `~>`, etc.):* Represents edges with a combination of directionality (e.g., left or undirected, right or undirected).

|===
|Orientation |V2 Syntax |V3 Syntax

|Pointing Left
|`-(<E1:A)-`
|`\<-[A:E1]-`

|Pointing Right
|-(E1>:A)-
|`-[A:E1]\->`

|Undirected
|`-(U1:A)-`
|`\~[A:U1]~`

|Left or Undirected

> |`-((<E1`
> |`U1):A)-`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`-((<E1\|U1):A)-`
|`<\~[A:E1|U1|..]~`
```

|Right or Undirected

> |`-((E1>`
> |`U1):A)-`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`-((E1>|U1):A)-`
|`\~[A:E1|U1|..]~>`
```

> |Left, Undirected, or Right
> |`-((<E1`
> |`U1`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Any direction or undirected
|`-(<_|_|_>):A)-`

or

`-(:A)-`
|`-[A:U1|E1|..]-`

or

`-[A:]-`
```

|===

*Key Points:*

1. *Pointing Left or Right:*

* V2 and V3 both allow pointing in specific directions using `<` or `>`.

2. *Undirected:*

* In V2, edges like `-(U1:A)-` are undirected.
* In V3, `\~[A:U1]~` the syntax is used for the same purpose, aligning with modern GQL standards.

3. *Combination (Left or Undirected, Right or Undirected):*

> * V2 uses combinations like `-((<E1|U1):A)-` to capture multiple edge types and directions.
> * V3 introduces syntax like <\~[A:E1|U1]~ to simplify and unify these patterns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In V2, the absence of a named edge set or a direction marker means any edge with any direction.
* In V3, `-` indicates any direction (left, right, or undirected) if is used as the directed brackets: `-[ ]-`
```

= Query Language Syntax Versions
:description: Summary of the differences between GSQL syntax V1 and V2.

GSQL has three syntax versions: V3, V2, and V1 (legacy version).
In TigerGraph 3.5, the default syntax version was changed to V2.
Currently, V2 remains the default syntax version. In a future release, V3 will become the default syntax version.
This page provides a summary of the differences between V2 and V3, as well as V1 and V2. It also includes guidance on how to change your V1 query into a V2 query.

== Differences between V2 and V3

The table below highlights the differences between V2 and V3, focusing on the `FROM` clause.
Note that V3 still supports V2 style syntax, for backward compatibility.

|===
|Feature|V2 Style |V3 Style

|Vertex-Edge-Vertex Markers
|Use `source_vset -(edge_set)- target_vset` notation. Vertices and edges are separated without additional symbols for vertices, for example, `Person -(FRIENDS)- Colleague`.

> |Use `(source_vset) -[edge_set]- (target_vset)` notation, improving clarity and aligning with GQL style. Vertices are enclosed in parentheses () and edges in square brackets []. For example: `(Person) -[FRIENDS]- (Colleague)`, making the structure visually clearer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Use `(source_vset) -[edge_set]- (target_vset)` notation, improving clarity and aligning with GQL style. Vertices are enclosed in parentheses () and edges in square brackets []. For example: `(Person) -[FRIENDS]- (Colleague)`, making the structure more explicit.
```

|Alias Ordering

> |Object sets and aliases follow `source_vset:Alias -(edge_set:EdgeAlias)- target_set:Alias`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Object sets precede aliases: `source_vset:Alias -(edge_set:EdgeAlias)- target_set:Alias`.
```

> |Object sets and aliases follow `(Alias:source_vset) -[EdgeAlias:edge_set]- (Alias:target_set)`, reversing the order of alias vs. object set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Aliases precede object sets: `(Alias:source_vset) -[EdgeAlias:edge_set]- (Alias:target_set)`, reversing the order of V2.
```

|Symbols for Edge Direction
|Directionality is applied at the edge-set level. Supports `<` (left), `>` (right), and `_` (undirected).

> |Directionality applies to the entire edge pattern. Symbols include `<-` (left), `->` (right), `~` (undirected).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Directionality applies to the entire edge pattern. Symbols include `\<-` (left), `\->` (right), `~` (undirected).
```

|Edge Direction Syntax

> |Supports granular directionality at the individual edge set level. Multiple edge sets in a pattern can have distinct directions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Supports granular directionality at the individual edge set level.
Each edge set in an edge pattern can have its own direction.
```
Two comments:
1. It is more precise to say, "each thing in a group can have its own property" than to say, "this group of things can have different/multiple properties."  In the latter, we still haven't make a clear statement about individually, just about different or multiple things.
2. For better documentation editing and maintenance, it is better to write 1 sentence per line:
https://asciidoctor.org/docs/asciidoc-recommended-practices/#one-sentence-per-line

|Directionality applies globally at the edge pattern level, making the syntax more concise.

|Quantified Multi-Hop Patterns
|Use explicit repetition for multi-hop patterns, e.g., `-\(FRIENDS*1..3\)->`.

> |Supports the {m,n} syntax for quantified multi-hop patterns, e.g., `-\[FRIENDS\]->\{1,3\}`, following GQL standards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Use explicit repetition for multi-hop patterns, e.g., `-(FRIENDS*1..3)->`.
|Supports the {m,n} syntax for quantified multi-hop patterns, e.g., `-[FRIENDS]\->{1,3}`, following GQL standards.
```

|Filters in Edge Patterns
|Filters are applied outside the `FROM` clause, e.g.,
`SELECT Person FROM Person -(FRIENDS)- Colleague WHERE FRIENDS.length > 2`.
|Filters can also be placed within an edge pattern for more local scope , e.g.,
`SELECT Person FROM (Person) -[FRIENDS WHERE FRIENDS.length > 2]-> (Colleague)`.

|===

=== V2 vs. V3 Syntax: Examples and Explanations

1. *Vertex-Edge-Vertex Markers:*

* *V2 Syntax:* `Person -(FRIENDS)- Colleague`
* *V3 Syntax:* `(Person) -[FRIENDS]- (Colleague)`

> * In V3, vertices are enclosed in parentheses `( )` and edges in square brackets `[ ]`, following the GQL standard for clarity and explicit representation of path patterns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In V3, vertices are enclosed in parentheses `( )` and edges in square brackets `[ ]`, following the GQL standard for more explicit representation of path patterns.
```

2. *Alias Ordering:*

* *V2 Syntax:* `Person:p -(FRIENDS:f)- Colleague:c`
* *V3 Syntax:* `(p:Person) -[f:FRIENDS]- (c:Colleague)`

> * The `alias:object_set` format in V3 improves readability, particularly in queries with complex relationships.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

3. *Symbols for Edge Direction:*

* *V2 Syntax:* `-(FRIENDS>:f)-`

> * *V3 Syntax:* `<-[f:FRIENDS]->`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *V3 Syntax:* `\<-[f:FRIENDS]\->`
```

* Directionality is applied globally to the entire edge pattern.

4. *Filters in Edge Patterns:*

* *V2 Syntax:* Filtering is applied outside the `FROM` clause using a `WHERE` condition:

> [source,gsql]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *V2 Syntax:* Filtering is applied outside the `FROM` clause using a `WHERE` condition:
+
[source,gsql]
```
"+" on a line by itself, between two blocks will join the blocks, in this case, meaning the 2nd block will keep the indentation of the first one.

----
SELECT Person FROM Person -(FRIENDS)- Colleague
WHERE FRIENDS.length > 2
----
* *V3 Syntax:* Filters can also be placed within an edge pattern for more local scope:

> [source,gsql]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *V3 Syntax:* Filters can also be placed within an edge pattern for more local scope:
+
[source,gsql]
```

----
SELECT Person FROM (Person) -[FRIENDS WHERE FRIENDS.length > 2]- (Colleague)
----

5. *Quantified Multi-Hop Patterns:*
* *V2 Syntax:* `-\(FRIENDS*1..3\)->`
* *V3 Syntax:* `-\[FRIENDS\]->\{1,3\}`
* In V3, quantification is expressed using `{m,n}` syntax for variable-length edge patterns. This aligns with GQL standards, providing a concise and consistent way to represent repeating edge patterns.

== Comparing V2 and V3 Edge Directions

In the following table,

> 1. *E1 and E2:* These represent directed edge types. A directed edge has a defined direction, such as `Person -> Company`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. *E1 and E2:* These represent directed edge types. A directed edge has a defined direction, such as `Person \-> Company`.
```

2. *U1 and U2:* These represent undirected edge types. An undirected edge does not have a direction and connects vertices symmetrically, such as `Person - Person`.

3. *Alias (A):* The alias is a short name or label given to an edge or vertex for use in queries.

4. *Edge Direction:* 

* *Left (`<`):* Represents edges directed towards the starting vertex.
* *Right (`>`):* Represents edges directed away from the starting vertex.
* *Undirected (`~`):* Represents edges with no directionality.
* *Combination (`<~`, `~>`, etc.):* Represents edges with a combination of directionality (e.g., left or undirected, right or undirected).

|===
|Orientation |V2 Syntax |V3 Syntax

|Pointing Left
|-(<E1:A)-

> |<-[A:E1]-

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|\<-[A:E1]-
```

|Pointing Right
|-(E1>:A)-

> |-[A:E1]->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|-[A:E1]\->
```

|Undirected
|-(U1:A)-

> |\~[A:U1]\~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|~[A:U1]~
```

= Query Language Syntax Versions
:description: Summary of the differences between GSQL syntax V1 and V2.

GSQL has three syntax versions: V3, V2, and V1 (legacy version).
In TigerGraph 3.5, the default syntax version was changed to V2.
Currently, V2 remains the default syntax version. In a future release, V3 will become the default syntax version.
This page provides a summary of the differences between V2 and V3, as well as V1 and V2. It also includes guidance on how to change your V1 query into a V2 query.

== Differences between V2 and V3

> The table below highlights the differences between V2 and V3, focusing on the `FROM` clause.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The table below highlights the differences between V2 and V3, focusing on the `FROM` clause.
Note that V3 still supports V2 style syntax, for backward compatibility.
```

|===

> |Feature|V2 |V3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Feature|V2 Style |V3 Style
```

|Vertex-Edge-Vertex Markers
|Use `source_vset -(edge_set)- target_vset` notation.
|Use `(source_vset) -[edge_set]- (target_vset)` notation, improving clarity and aligning with GQL style.

|Alias Order
|Object sets and aliases follow `source_vset:S -(edge_set:E)- target_set:T`.

> |Object sets and aliases follow `(S:source_vset) -[E:edge_set]- (T:target_set)`, making alias assignment explicit and intuitive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Object sets and aliases follow `(S:source_vset) -[E:edge_set]- (T:target_set)`, reversing the order of alias vs. object set
```

|Symbols for Edge Direction
|Arrowheads `<` or `>` are placed inside parentheses after the edge type to indicate direction (e.g., `-(EdgeType:e)-`).

> |Same as V2, but notation uses square brackets for edges, such as `[edge_set]` for improved clarity.

Reviewer: This section needs to be expanded.
We don't have a great summary of V2 notation. See https://docs.tigergraph.com/gsql-ref/4.1/querying/select-statement/#_path_edge_pattern

For V3, see https://github.com/tigergraph/ecosys/blob/master/demos/guru_scripts/docker/tutorial/4.x/README.md#pattern-summary

Note the section on repeated hops. That is another difference that I forgot to mention.

|Embedded Edge Filtering
|Filtering conditions for edges are applied outside the `FROM` clause using `WHERE`.

> |Filtering conditions for edges can now be embedded directly in the `FROM` clause for concise filtering. For example: `(Person) -[Friend WHERE Friend.length > 2]-> (Colleague)`.

Reviewer: I noticed that Antora is converting `->` to a single special arrow character when it processing it into a web page.
We need to find a way to make it stay as 2 separate characters.

|Path Patterns and Multi-Hops
|Multi-hop path patterns are supported with `-(edge_set)-`.

> |Supports multi-hop path patterns using `(source_vset) -[edge_set]- (target_vset)`. Updated notation provides better readability and clarity.

Reviewer: This is not correct. `-[E]-` is a single hop, not a multi-hop.
See https://github.com/tigergraph/ecosys/blob/master/demos/guru_scripts/docker/tutorial/4.x/README.md#variable-length-pattern-quantifier

== Differences between V2 and V3

The table below highlights the differences between V2 and V3, focusing on the `FROM` clause.
Note that V3 still supports V2 style syntax, for backward compatibility.

|===
|Feature|V2 Style |V3 Style

|Vertex-Edge-Vertex Markers
|Use `source_vset -(edge_set)- target_vset` notation. Vertices and edges are separated without additional symbols for vertices (e.g., `Person -(FRIENDS)- Colleague`).
|Use `(source_vset) -[edge_set]- (target_vset)` notation, improving clarity and aligning with GQL style. Vertices are enclosed in parentheses () and edges in square brackets [] (e.g., `(Person) -[FRIENDS]- (Colleague)`), making the structure visually clearer.

|Alias Order
|Object sets and aliases follow `source_vset:S -(edge_set:E)- target_set:T`.
|Object sets and aliases follow `(S:source_vset) -[E:edge_set]- (T:target_set)`, reversing the order of alias vs. object set.

|Edge Direction Notation
|Edge direction is indicated using arrowheads inside the parentheses for directed edges, e.g., `-(FRIENDS>:f)- or -(:e)-`.

> |Edge direction uses square brackets with arrowheads, e.g., `[FRIENDS>]` for directed edges. This aligns with modern graph query standards, providing consistency.

Reviewer: * You have two rows that are essentially for the same thing: Edge Direction Notation and Symbols for Edge Direction
* brackets: The brackets themselves are already addressed in row 1. The relevant point here is that V3 direction indicators are outside the brackets (V3) vs inside the brackets (V2). 
* The other issue is how does each style show the edge's direction is (1) rightward, (2) leftward, (3) undirected, (4) a combination, or (5) any.  It's more complicated than what you have written.  I think I had better try to write out the summary. I think this table could highlight the differences, but we really need a separate table, like https://github.com/tigergraph/ecosys/blob/master/demos/guru_scripts/docker/tutorial/4.x/README.md#table-of-edge-patterns-following-iso-gql-standard-syntax, to fully explain it.

|Filtering Within Edge Descriptions
|Filters are applied outside the `FROM` clause, e.g.,
`SELECT Person FROM Person -(FRIENDS)- Colleague WHERE FRIENDS.length > 2`.

> |Filters are integrated directly into the edge pattern within the FROM clause, e.g.,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Filters can also be placed within an edge pattern for more local scope , e.g.,
```
GQL supports WHERE in both locations.

`SELECT Person FROM (Person) -[FRIENDS WHERE FRIENDS.length > 2]-> (Colleague)`.

|Repeating Patterns
|Supported using quantifiers like `*m..n` for repeating hops, e.g., `-[:FRIENDS*1..3]->`.

> |Supports GQL-style quantifiers {m,n} for variable-length patterns, e.g., `-[FRIENDS]->{1,3}`. Both options are available in V3 for flexibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Supports GQL-style quantifiers {m,n} for variable-length patterns, e.g., `-[FRIENDS]->{1,3}`. 
```
We already made the global statement that V3 also supports V2 syntax.

|Multi-Hop Patterns
|Multi-hop patterns are expressed through a sequence of single hops. Each hop is written explicitly in the query.

> |Multi-hop patterns can be expressed concisely using quantifiers, improving query simplicity and readability, e.g., `(Person) -[FRIENDS*]-> (Celebrity)`.

Reviewer: Just drop this row. Both statements are incorrect.
* V2: We do have multiple-hop paths, e.g. X1 -(E1) - X2 - (E2) - X3
* V3: Quantification (repeating) is different than multihop.

|Symbols for Edge Direction
|Supports `<`, `>`, and no arrowhead for undirected edges, e.g., `-(Edge:e)-`.
|Supports `<`, `>`, and `~` for undirected edges in square brackets, e.g., `[Edge~]`.

|Edge Type Wildcards
|Use `_` or `ANY` for any edge type, directed or undirected, e.g., `-(ANY:e)-`.
|Similar to V2 but uses square brackets, e.g., `[ANY~]`.

> 

Reviewer: This row should be merged with the "Edge Direction Notation" row above, but this title is better "Symbols for Edge Direction".
